{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f36\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f37\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f39\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f40\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f41\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f42\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f43\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f44\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid3103810}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.6843;}{\info
{\operator Ziegler}{\creatim\yr2008\mo7\dy1\hr15\min6}{\revtim\yr2008\mo7\dy1\hr15\min6}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1721}{\nofchars9813}{\nofcharsws11511}{\vern16393}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl }
\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\grfdocevents0\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\horzdoc\dghspace120\dgvspace120\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow3
\jcompress\viewkind4\viewscale100\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot3103810 \fet0{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\sectd \linex0\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}
{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\b\fs32\cf10\insrsid3103810 Changes incorporated into versions of SRIM/TRIM}{\b\fs32\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par }{\b\fs28\cf11\insrsid3103810 SRIM-2008
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid3103810 {\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 2008.}{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 04 }{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 Corrected bug in resuming file of transmitted particles. (}{\insrsid3103810 Jes\'fa
s P. de Vicente)
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 2008.03 Made changes to sputtering of targets Z=13 to21 to omit discontinuity in treatment.
\par \tab  Added Help buttons to TRIM plots, and included additional comments.
\par \tab  Changed ordinate units for Ion/Recoil distributions to same as for Ions.
\par 2008.02 Added Ordinate scales to ion trajectory plots. Removed bug in calc. for gas layers 
\par }\pard \ql \fi720\li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810  within solid targets. Added Chapters 8 & 9 from SRIM textbook to SRIM Help.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 2008.01 No changes to basic calculation of SRIM-2003. Many small bugs have been corrected.
\par \tab This version of SRIM is consistent with the new SRIM Textbook (2008). Allows
\par \tab changes of Ion/Energy/Angle during calculation and added to previous TRIM results.
\par }{\b\fs28\cf11\insrsid3103810 SRIM-2006
\par }{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 2006.01 No changes to basic calculation of SRIM-2003. This upgrade has the following changes:
\par       (1) You can now download the complete plots showing the experimental/theoretical
\par \tab stopping of any ion in any elemental target. This file is large (20MB+) but it
\par \tab contains over 22,000 experimental data points reported since 1899. These plots
\par \tab may be accessed using the button on the SRIM-2006 initial window.
\par       (2) The Error Message "The number of recoils has exceeded SRIM memory" has been fixed.
\par }\pard \ql \fi720\li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 The fix has been tested for up to 1M recoiling atoms in a recoil cascade from a single
\par recoil event, Typically, you run into this problem when you use heavy ions with high 
\par energies, approaching a GeV, in which a single collision can transfer a large amount of
\par energy, and the recoiling atom may generate up to a million further recoils. If the number
\par of recoils exceeds the current TRIM memory allocation, the above error message will pop
\par up and explain how to enlarge the TRIM memory to fix the problem. The number of 
\par allowed recoils can be increased using the file: /Data/SRIM.cfg. This file contains 
\par instructions on how to increase the number of allowed recoils.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810       (3) You can now make a file EXYZ.txt which shows the position of the incident
\par             ion at discrete energy points. For example, for Bi(500 keV) you can make
\par             a file showing its position at 100 keV increments. This option is at the bottom
\par             of the new TRIM input window, along with a Help and an example.
\par       (4) You can now enter individual damage energies for each atom in each layer.
\par             Hence, silicon in crystalline silicon can have different displacement and
\par             Binding energies that silicon in a separate SiO2 layer. This improves both damage
\par             calculations and sputtering calculations.
\par       (5) The TRIM output window "SHOW LIVE DATA" has been improved. FYI,
\par             this is a button in the TRIM window during the calculation. It is on the upper
\par             left corner. I think most people don't know it exists, but some people find it
\par             very useful for ions with large recoil cascades. They can see what is going on.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri-630\nowidctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin-630\lin0\itap0 {\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 There has been NO CHANGES TO THE CALCULATION OF STOPPING POWER OR RANGES.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\wrapdefault\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\fs28\cf11\insrsid3103810 SRIM-2003
\par }{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 2003.30 Added ability to increase maximum number of recoils using file SRIM.cfg.
\par 2003.27 Added optional file EXYZ to show ion positions at discrete energies.
\par 2003.26 Added optional \'93Live Data\'94 window to SRIM to show recoil calculations. (2005)
\par 2003.25 General release of SRIM-2003 (1/1/2004)
\par 2003.25 Final version of SRIM-2003 (1/1/2004)
\par 2003.24 Extended Max Energy to 10 GeV/u, plus fixed a few small bugs.
\par 2003.23 Added file for Transmission Sputtering of recoil atoms
\par 2003.18-22 Added new warnings/coments for special TRIM calculations.
\par 2003.17 Minor bug which led to Error 53- "File not found"
\par 2003.16 Corrected  display of Corrections to Compounds to be same definition as on website.
\par 2003.15 Bug in high energy light ions with full collisions corrected.
\par 2003.14 Initial versions (.09 to .14) have minor bugs corrected.
\par 2003.08 Initial versions (.00 to .08) have significant bugs. Please update to newer versions.
\par 2003.00 Totally new stopping powers, with significant improvement for Heavy Ions.
\par \tab  Introduction of Nuclear Stopping using specific atom/atom calculations.
\par \tab  }{\b\fs22\cf9\insrsid3103810 SRIM Module}{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810  is batch program to supply stopping and ranges to other software.
\par }{\b\fs28\cf11\insrsid3103810 SRIM-2000}{\b\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par }{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 2000.41 Plots available for stopping of H and He ions into elemental targets.
\par 2000.40 Expiration date of SRIM led to file parity checks. Corrected.
\par 2000.39 Minor improvements. Fixed bug in neutron damage calculation.
\par }{\fs22\cf6\insrsid3103810 2000.38 Fixed significant bug in light ion stopping > 1 MeV/u.            
\par }{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 2000.37 Fixed "European" decimal problem in Stopping/Range tables.
\par 2000.36 Many minor improvements from beta-test email.
\par }{\fs22\cf6\insrsid3103810 2000.35 Fixed TRIM random numbers, which repeated after 256k cycles.}{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par 2000.34 Modified PRINT commands for upgraded graphics. Minor bugs fixed.
\par 2000.32 Corrected bug in SR calculation of He, Li stopping in heavy gases.
\par 2000.31 Corrected bug on Resuming TRIM from an old calculation.
\par }{\b\fs22\cf2\insrsid3103810 2000.3x Introduction of TRIM as full 32-bit software, with unlimited memory.}{\b\fs22\cf11\insrsid3103810 
\par }{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par }{\fs22\cf6\insrsid3103810 2000.11 Corrected serious bug in transferring compound stoiciometries to TRIM}{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par 2000.10\tab  Incorporated new high energy stopping power theory (E>1 MeV/u) in SR.
\par \tab  Setup TRIM to run in a window (not full screen) and in background.
\par   \tab  Allowed TRIM to be run in automatic (batch) mode with no keyboard inputs.
\par \tab  Fixed bug in using TRIM.DAT file for direct input of recoil data.
\par 2000.08\tab  Fixed decimal point (European problem) when use commas instead of periods. 
\par  \tab  Changed sputtering to monolayer steps. Add print button to Tables.
\par 2000.05\tab  End of beta-test versions. First general release via web-site.
\par 2000.01\tab  Converted to Visual Basic beginning in 1998. All programs converted
\par \tab  except the TRIM Monte-Carlo program.
\par }{\fs28\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par }{\b\fs28\cf11\insrsid3103810 SRIM-95}{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par 97.06\tab Corrected Free-Flight-Path bug for very thin surface layers.
\par 96.01\tab Renamed "TRIM" disk to "SRIM" to avoid confusion with TRIM.EXE program.
\par \tab Corrected bug in sputtering calculation (bug only in 96.00 versions).
\par 96.00   TRIM now allows up to 8 layers made of up to 12 elements.
\par \tab Created new Setup for complex Biological Samples.
\par 95.9\tab Corrected bug in stopping in solid forms of gases (H,He,N,O,Ne,Ar,Kr,Xe)
\par \tab Versions 95.0-95.6 in error 200% for very low energies (Baragiola,USA)
\par \tab Corrected sputtering calculations so they were compatable to TRIM-SP,
\par \tab the Biersack FORTRAN program. (Webb, England)
\par \tab Clarified VACANCY.TXT to identify primary-knock-ons. (Littmark,Germany)
\par 95.5  \tab Conversion of TRIM to "PowerBasic" with speed increase of 5x !!!
\par         \tab Corrected bug in stopping of heavy ions in silicon.
\par 95.2    \tab Creation of standard Input/Output files for specialized TRIM calculations.
\par         \tab This allows output from TRANSIT.TXT to be used as input file TRIM.DAT
\par         \tab }{\fs22\cf1\lang1046\langfe1033\langnp1046\insrsid3103810 for multiple TRIM calculation (Calvino, Barcelona). }{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 Corrected bug in PRAL
\par         \tab in stopping of H and He in compound targets.
\par 95.1    \tab Comprehensive change in all Ion Stopping Powers. New theory for heavy ions.
\par         \tab Reluctantly, stopping in gases is also included, although not too accurate.
\par         \tab PRAL updated with better straggling algorithm (J.P. Biersack). New feature
\par         \tab allows the starting of ions within the target, with any energy and angle.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28\cf11\insrsid3103810 SRIM-91}{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par 94.40   \tab Redesigned sputtering tables to give full information. (D. Baldwin, USA)
\par 92.20\tab Corrected scaling of displayed plots of ions (U. Littmark @ Julich)
\par 92.15   \tab Corrected sputtering so Resumes TRIM calculation with correct display.
\par 92.12   \tab PRAL (quick calculation of ion ranges) - corrected Sn for compounds.
\par         \tab TRIM - Electronic straggling of ions included for all ions (used to be
\par          \tab only for H-Li ions. Now use Eq.4-32, the lower of Firsov or Bohr.
\par          \tab - Corrected energy loss files for very-very deep ions.
\par 92.05   \tab Changed Nuclear Stopping Powers for Compounds to be LSS+Bragg's Rule.
\par \tab  \tab }{\fs22\cf1\lang1031\langfe1033\langnp1031\insrsid3103810 (H. Paul @ Linz, Austria and M. Berger @ NIST, USA).
\par }{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 92.02   \tab Corrected neutron/electron damage bug (R. Macaulay-Newcombe @ McMaster).
\par 92.01   \tab Corrected Lateral Straggling Bug (H. Paul @ U.Linz, Austria).
\par 91.05   \tab Corrected statistical range distribution moments (H. Glawishnig, Siemens).
\par         \tab Revised Skewness and Kurtosis to fit VLSI modelling conventions.
\par         \tab Detailed analysis near layer edges to prevent artificial peaks and dips.
\par         \tab TRIM with No Graphics possible for background calculation.
\par 91.04   \tab Neutron/Electron Damage using Primary Recoil File: RECOILS.DAT
\par 91.03   \tab Bug fixed for ions with ranges > 1 meter, and more than 1,000,000 ions.
\par 91.00   \tab Corrected bug in COLLISON.TXT which listed wrong primary collison atom.
\par         \tab Added lateral distribution to file COLLISON.TXT
\par         \tab Reduced memory required for TRIM for non-recoil calculations by 72k.
\par 
\par }{\fs22\cf12\insrsid3103810 ================================================================================
\par }{\b\fs22\cf2\insrsid3103810 "TRIM-xx" }{\fs22\cf12\insrsid3103810 renamed }{\b\fs22\cf11\insrsid3103810 "SRIM-xx" }{\fs22\cf12\insrsid3103810 in 1991 to end confusion between the 
\par \tab Monte Carlo program TRIM and package of programs titled TRIM-xx.
\par ================================================================================
\par }{\b\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par }{\b\fs28\cf2\insrsid3103810 TRIM-90 }{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par         \tab (EGA three-dimensional TRIM- First general release, Feb.,1990).
\par 90.09   \tab Plots of Sputtering Yield vs. Surface Binding Energy.
\par 90.04   \tab Allowed plots for calculation with only one ion.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28\cf2\insrsid3103810 TRIM-89}{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par         \tab A large dictionary of COMPOUNDS has been integrated into the programs.
\par         \tab The stopping of ions in compounds is executed using the formalism 
\par         \tab described in "The Stopping of Ions in Compounds".  Also, a file of 
\par         \tab vacancy production is made using hot-key "V" while executing TRIM. 
\par         \tab (NOTE: Early release version 5.0 of TRIM-89 contains a bad bug.)
\par 5.5     \tab Added Comments to file TDATA.OLD which contains ion/target data for TRIM.
\par         \tab Corrected Energy into Vacancies on main plot.
\par         \tab Added AutoSave feature for long calculations.
\par 5.4     \tab Corrected printout of Sputtering if < 0.1 atoms/ion.
\par 5.3     \tab Corrected COLLSION file to correctly account for all cascade recoils.
\par 5.2     \tab Corrected Transmission angle-of-deflection Error.
\par 5.1     \tab Changed Maximum Impact Parameter to Eq.(4-24) instead of (4-20) (page 117)
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28\cf2\insrsid3103810 TRIM-88}{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par         \tab TRIM has been converted to Turbo-BASIC from the original FORTRAN.  
\par         \tab This will allow the use of Enhanced Graphics for future versions.  
\par         \tab A table of common compounds has been added for convenience. 
\par         \tab Ion energies up to 2 GeV/amu now available.  The transport-equation 
\par         \tab program, PRAL, has been extended to evaluated compound targets.  
\par         \tab NOTE: This Version is incompatible with all earlier versions. 
\par         \tab Earlier data can not be used with this TRIM.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28\cf2\insrsid3103810 TRIM-87}{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par         \tab Added transverse straggling of the ions, and ion sputtering of the 
\par         \tab surface. Corrected many small bugs in various plots. Changed ion stopping
\par         \tab in silicon for Z1<19 because of much new data.
\par }{\fs28\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par }{\b\fs28\cf2\insrsid3103810 TRIM-86}{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par         \tab File TRIM.IN changed to make direct changes easier.  Set up disk files 
\par         \tab for Transmitted and Backscattered ion data.  Corrected bug in lateral 
\par         \tab spread of low-Z ions (minor thing).
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28\cf2\insrsid3103810 TRIM-86 }{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par         \tab Added command "P" which prints out the details of each collision to allow 
\par         \tab access to the inner workings of TRIM. Major change made in definition of
\par         \tab cascade displacements and vacancies to make it agree closely with the 
\par         \tab assumptions of Kinchin and Pease.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs22\cf2\insrsid3103810 TRIM-85}{\fs22\cf1\insrsid3103810 
\par         \tab Original release in 8/85. This version, and all subsequent versions, 
\par        \tab may differ from the FORTRAN version of TRIM maintained by J.P. Biersack 
\par         \tab and used on mainframes and advanced workstations.
\par 
\par }}